I think all of them are great speakers, I get lost from words.
As it is, I, you know that Indian music has something to do with the Spirit
and also it has to do with your awareness. Say for example, when you start an Indian music
...in any Raghas, first they pick up your foundations, how you... how you see,
how it is going to be within yourself, say your Muladhara is built up, to begin with, so that you are settled down
and then the infrastructure is built and then the whole thing, the permutations and combinations are being built up.
But it is a kind of a movement of your awareness, which you'll be noticed.
That in the classical music, first you have a very slow movement to bring your attention
...in a particular direction to settle you down and then gradually you find the awareness
starts becoming alert, then it becomes dynamic, then it starts bubbling.
The other way round are the things like drinking, wines, the other way round.
See, it is first you are bubbling, you are happy. Then you start drinking the wines and all that,
then you start more bubbling this thing and trying to, you feel that you are absolutely abundant
and you are in a bad place mood. But gradually it settles down into a very morose ending
till I don't know how you come out of your pubs. So, this is,
this is the reason why all the saints have said that drinking is against awareness
but music is not because see, at this time, as he is saying, it's 4 o'clock, I didn't see the time all this while
but it's which is 4 o'clock at this time, you are so alert and fresh because it has nourished your awareness.
It has definitely nourished all of us. Now, regarding the artist,
I don't know, he says he is inspired or whatever it is but there is a kind
of a work which I think is played by the Kundalini of a person
but it doesn't work in everyone, it works in very sensitive people, I've seen
and they react in such a manner that I myself am amazed sometimes how dynamic they become
and how joyous, gradually the joy starts bubbling in them. I mean, they are entertaining you
they are giving you joy but they see their own creative powers working, they see the whole thing completing
and that is the thing that gives them joy. See now, this is, is the creation, that's before Me
and see how he was joyous and how you were enjoying his creation and he was also enjoying his creation
and the same gentleman who was playing tabla was, I was singing, he was rhythmically moving with him
the same way as he was, the rhythm was there and sometimes he was playing with his rhythm
but what you call is the playfulness and the Leela,
Leela was there between the two. So the life has not to be a burdensome thing, it has not to be like a hangover
but has to be something very light, bubbling, beautiful and joyous. So here an artist also
because he's talking about Gula Marikhasava, I've seen him. He was in the beginning very serious, started
and he went up to a point. Then he would just start as if he's Shri Krishna playing Holi, he would go on playing
[Marathi]
then he would start jumping half way. I saw him, every time he used to take a tan, he used to go half way up and down like that.
So dynamic, I mean at that age when I saw him, I was myself amazed because this gentleman, he's not only singing but he's doing all kinds of exercises
and so beautifully he was singing, so beautifully. So this is what it is that, it is a
different side that music is absolutely
nourishes our awareness, just like flowers, just like all the beautiful things of the world
nourish our awareness. Music, maximum it has the effect and that's why you see that even at
4 o'clock we are so fresh and tomorrow we are going to look absolutely fresh. I know we have done this many a times.
So, this is what is to the music and to the artist, I must say, the way he was lost into it.
He was very meditative in between, I saw him, he got meditative. You see, when they have to
get into their creativity, they go into meditative mode and from there they pick on to it, right.
While playing one raga only, he thought of dropping one uh.. note and playing another raga, he went into that raga.
See, just sort of you, you completely lose your self-consciousness and you can get merged into the
portion of notes and ragas but there are maryadas. In Indian music there are maryadas.
You cannot just start singing darwali and end up with the jazz or something, you cannot. You have to keep darwali with darwali,
you can from darwali you can drop something, you can go into another raga, it's different but you cannot just start
uh.. going from one raga into some sort of an English music or some sort of a
another African music, it cannot be. You have to keep two ragas and there is a maryadas and this is the thing
we have to understand that we are enjoying ourselves, in our awareness, we are all in a very joyous mood
because we have maryadas. If you don't have maryadas, you can never enjoy. It get lost, it get lost and it reacts.
So the whole thing today was a beautiful uh.. court as you said and in the court there has to be a protocol,
there has to be maryadas and everybody has a place and then it's a beautiful thing to live together.
So in the whole of our society, Sahaja yoga society and with maryadas, then we'll change the whole world, no doubt about it.
And then the music will be of a very high quality, very nourishing, which will nourish our Spirit
and which we'll be able to enjoy ourselves and for our progeny we'll be a beautiful world.
So I bless you all that you try to invite the dedication and devotion of these artists
and see at this young age, how far they have gone for music. So in the same way, the music of your Spirit,
you also have to dedicate and also this music also, if you can learn, it will be a good idea, if some of you try.
But in any case, I don't know this music, I cannot sing but at least I can appreciate and in the same way you are appreciating.
In My childhood, both of us used to sing very well but I took to medicine because I had to talk to [unclear] later on,
as we did today and that's why My sister took to music, that's the difference.
Otherwise we were both good singers but I couldn't take to music and so now I'm very happy
that we are so much appreciating it and understanding.
I would like Indian music to spread to the whole world, that maybe because you might think I'm Indian, it's not the point but I think
Indian music, if you know, you can know any music and as you have seen in the case of Simon, he told Me that he has become very creative
since he did some Indian music lessons. So, because there's freedom, you see, he's free, there's freedom but in maryadas.
It's like a aeroplane which is properly tied up and is properly in his maryadas, can fly anywhere.
In the same way, he has got his maryadas and then he went absolutely into the apsars.
So these two principles are to be understood and to be enjoyed in music and I'm sure that
we will also be able to produce some very good musicians out of you, if not from you, at least from your children.
May God bless you! Thank you!